Welcome back.
It's time to walk through our own implementation of hash table.
Now before we get started I do want to mention something that you may be wondering about that is this
underscore over here.
What does that mean in most other languages like Java.
When you create a class you can have private properties that is properties that I can't access outside
of this class.
So I wouldn't be able to do my hash table underscore Passhe and access this property or method.
Now with javascript E6 that's not really possible.
And there is a common standard which is to put underscore here and the javascript world which says this
is a private property.
Now this is just meaningless really.
I can still access the hash method but it is a developer standard and the javascript community to let
other developers know that hey you shouldn't be saying this even though you technically can't and there
are ways to make it work.
And half private properties but it requires things like closures symbols or weak maps which again is
beyond the scope of this course and we don't need to worry about.
So that's where the underscore is coming from.
We're not usually going to access hash function like this.
Right now that we've got that out of the way let's talk a little bit about what this does.
If I enter and here the grapes we first create a new variable that is hash that is equal to zero.
And then this key We're going to grab the lenth or grapes.
So that is one two three four five six and we're going to add zero which comes from the hash Plus key
character code at.
And character code at in javascript simply gives us an integer between 0 and this number representing
the UTF 16 code.
So that's just an encoding it is pretty much saying give me a character code because remember in memory
a string or a letter is represented as a number.
So this method allows us to say at index whatever we put in the parameter.
So let's say we're looking at index of I the very first on will be g.
We're going to get the character code for G.
That is a number where we multiply that by the index.
Again just to make sure s makes a unique and then we use what's called the modulo operator to make sure
that this stays within the length of 50 the size of our data.
And then we return the hash.
An easy way to see what's happening here is to simply console dialog Passhe.
If I run this we see that it's going to loop through our grapes character by character.
It's going to generate some sort of a hash and because this hash gets constantly looped over we include
whatever the generated.
Let's see the first one is zero.
It's going to say 0 plus whatever this is.
Then the next iteration hash is going to equal 14 and generate something else which is 8 and keeps going
keeps going keeps going until we get 23.
You can take your time and go through this code if you really want to.
Again this is not the focus of this video so let's move on.
Using our hash function.
Let's do our very first method.
Let's create the set method.
This method is going to receive a key and a value.
And just so we can see this and what's going to happen we'll run this method here saying we want grapes
to equal 10000.
Lots of grapes because they are delicious.
If I run this I get undefined because while this isn't really doing anything the first thing we want
to do is to create a variable called Let address which will represent where we want to store this information.
And we'll say this dot
so all we're saying is store this data that we're going to insert the key value in this address space
that is created by our hash function and we give it the key of grapes.
Remember our little animation.
We're sending the grapes to into that magic little box that has the hash function.
From there we simply say if this dot data
address if it doesn't exist and there's nothing there because remember in a hash table we can have collisions
and because we only have 50 spaces 50 shelfs here we might have these collisions with enough data.
So we're going to check if there is nothing there.
In that case I'll just simply add that data.
We're going to save this data
address is going to be an array.
And in this new space new address space we're simply going to
by doing push key value.
So let's run this and see what happens.
And I have a misspelt address here.
Let's run that again.
I get on defined but let's see what happens if I just Konsole dot log this dot data here.
Well check that out.
We have 23 empty items on the 24th item.
We have grapes 10000 an array here and then 26 empty items after that.
Remember we have 50 shells in our memory and we have 23 24 plus 26 that's 50.
Except our grapes was inserted somewhere and 50.
It looks like the 24 spot.
Very cool.
But what happens if this already exists.
If I change the hash table to just have let's say two memory spaces and I click run here I get one empty
and grapes and if I change this around oh do you see that if I click again and let's say go back to
just grapes.
Check out what happens to my hash table.
I click run and it just deleted my previous entry.
We have a collision but we're not doing anything about it.
And we've just deleted our data that could have been really important to user data.
We definitely don't want that.
So in order to solve that we simply say if because we're checking here if there is nothing in that address
space do this.
Otherwise
simply add on to that array.
So we can actually just
run the same command here and nicer and cleaner way of doing this is to actually just take out the else
because regardless we're always going to be pushing key and value we're always going to be adding the
key and value that we set we add to the data.
So all we do is just remove this so that when I run this.
And just so we know what's happening.
Let's return this thought that I'm here I'm going to run.
And if we add here let's say another item this time we'll say apples and just 54 apples.
If I run this do you see what happened here.
If you look closely we have one empty item and then an array that contains inside of it.
The first index that is an array and a second index that is another rate because we've just pushed on
to our existing array because our memory space is only 2.
Very cool.
That wasn't too bad.
Let's keep going.
The next one is well I want to grab be able to grab grapes and apples we can use the get method here
which will receive a key and this method is going to work
very nicely by just saying get.
And then while we want to grab which will be grapes we're going to do the exact same thing in that we
run it through that black box where we're going to create or we're going to use the hash function to
get the address of where we want to go.
And now we have the address to where we want to grab our information from.
However remember that we store this information in a bucket.
So we have grapes and 10000.
How do we grab that.
We know where to get it from now.
We have the address but we now need to loop over and grab grapes and then 10000 or apples and 954.
Let me show you what I mean.
Well first create a variable says saying current bucket.
That will just be this hard data duct or address just so we don't repeat ourself.
And we have a reference to this address or the address and the data value.
So this means if we canceled log current bucket and I run this you see that I have the current bucket.
Even though this has two items.
Remember that it is technically just within its own bucket within one array.
If we increase this memory space to let's say 50 we see that this bucket contains grapes.
So we're grabbing this information but all we want to do is have 10000 being returned.
That's how hash tables work or the get in hash function works well all we need to do is to say if current
bucket and we'll say Dot Glenn.
That is if this current bucket has something in it.
In that case we are going to do something otherwise we're going to just return undefined because there's
nothing in the bucket We're checking if this actually exists.
So if there's nothing in the array if the length is 0 and the array is empty while then we're not interested
in it as a matter of fact we actually don't even need the length year because remember initially it's
just going to be an empty array with undefined and we add an array to each slot whenever we set something.
And it's an empty address so we can just leave it like that because if it's undefined ill skip over
and return undefined now.
And here we will do a for loop because remember we might have multiple items in this bucket like we
saw when we had to memory spaces in which case let me actually demonstrate that so we can see at a run
and current bucket against policy run that again.
All right if we cancel dialogue current bucket and run this we see that we have two items in that bucket.
So we will need to loop over using our favorite for loop which we've done a ton by now.
We're going to say as long as I is less than the crane bucket.
Lenth just increment by and within here.
This is a little bit tricky so hopefully you follow.
I'm going to say if current bucket by which is the index so remember is going to say zero which is going
to grab this then one which is going to grab this if Khurram back the grapes.
So if I do zero here that means grab the first in our case the ice so it's going to be zero first grab
this first array then grab the zero index within this array which will be grapes.
And then once it loops the next time around an eye is one it's going to be apples.
Check that against the key.
Remember the key that we receive here that we are looking for.
So if grapes which is the key matches with this item in that case just returned the current pocket the
tie and one because we want to return ten thousand.
Hopefully you fall here because if I run this I get ten thousand the get grapes is 10000.
If I do happen here It is 54.
How cool is that.
And looking at this I hope you understand on a deeper level the time complexity implications of hash
tables even though we're doing a loop here within the hash function.
Remember that hash functions are really really fast.
We're just looping over the key so we don't consider this to be a all event.
This is very very fast.
It's of one when we set something there's no loops here.
We're just adding it to our data.
We're just pushing it.
So that is of one.
And if we go to get most of the time if there's no collisions it's going to be 0 0 1 and in real life
most of the time you can consider that it is of one.
But in our really bad example with just two memory spaces and not a very good hash function well this
can become all over.
But for now because we're good programmers that won't happen right.
Everything will be good.
We have 0 of 1 get.
We have the for loop here that might create that list we saw in our example see this list that we have
here.
This is why we created and it would be all.
And if this list just kept going and kept growing and kept growing.
But there is one other method that I want us to build and to showcase to you.
One other downside of hash tables What if we wanted to go through all the keys of the hash table how
will we do that.
We're going to try and implement that in the next video.